say that the internet is written in pen
not in pencil it's very true you know
articles I wrote five years ago 10 years
ago but Buddhist philosophy people still
discover them today for the first time
um in theory videos I have you're on
YouTube about Buddhist philosophy about
veganism about politics but anything
else people can anytime stumbleupon um
and I sometimes get email pertaining to
particular projects I did years ago
sometimes those projects are very
short-term short-lived then I studied a
particular language etc and you know
when people are googling for that stuff
I may be one of the few sources they can
find so it is true I gained some level
of notoriety or micro fame for my
challenging views on Buddhist philosophy
Buddhist history butters politics
textual study especially of tera vaada
Buddhism whatever sable Mahayana
Buddhism is even more controversial but
let's not get into that in this video so
got email today from a guy named John I
just use first names normally when I
play reply to emails unless the person
tells me they want me to promote their
website or something i'll just use their
first name so John wrote to me says dear
izel I became interested in Buddhism
about a year ago and have been engaging
in meditation practice since that time I
very much enjoy your youtube videos
particularly those that pertain to
Buddhism is refreshing to hear an honest
and cogent rebuttal of the drivel that
Western Buddhist neophytes are forced to
endure perhaps an ineluctable
consequence of geography and language so
anyway obviously a very sympathetic
statement sympathetic to my view of the
thirty states there but of course the
other the other the other elephant in
the room is not geography and language
it's colonialism right imagine our whole
engagement with Buddhism would be very
different if India had conquered parts
of Europe and it wasn't instead the case
that Europe conquered parts of India
Buddhism could have come to Europe under
very different circumstances but really
the European rediscovery of Buddhism the
influential more recent discovery bosom
because we do have centuries and
centuries of contact with India and
Buddhism was above all the British
Empire conquering bits and pieces of
India it could have come to us from the
Portuguese it
could have come to us from the Spanish
of the Dutch but no it really was the
British Empire's adventure in India um
so yeah that's that's the the missing
leg of the stool here geography language
brute force colonialism um indeed so
continuing to quote this email to me
indeed I share your contempt for the
North American bastardization and
unabashed exploitation of Buddhism I'm
currently reading Richard Gombrich is
broken the social history of tear about
the Buddhism it has influenced my
perception of Buddhism as well as the
way I think about meditation practice
the only book I recommend by Richard
Gombrich is his very first book precept
in practice in the highlands of Sri
Lanka highlands of salon that is a good
book I do not recommend any of his later
books sorry Richard haha I know Richard
I think he's a great guy as a
personality I think he's a wonderful
dinner companion I think he's great
company a lot of people feel the
opposite other blog people feel is a
good scholar but is scary to eat dinner
with but maybe that's cuz you're a fraud
and maybe that's because he calls you
out for being a fraud one of those i
like i love about richard is that he
calls people over for being a fraud my
kind of guy but his first book is a
classic his later books i cannot
recommend that is i continue to read
this email i am interested in learning
more about your views on meditation and
the lack of benefits thereof my own
uneducated perspective is that
meditation was never intended as a
prescription for happiness ding ding
correct instead i see it as a long-term
process whose objective is related to
seeing truth through realizing the three
characteristics so i am interrupting my
reply to this email one of the crucial
phrases in the pally cannon is tearing
up desire by its roots so it depends on
what you mean by the word happiness the
outcome of meditation i'll come back to
this in a minute meditation is really
the wrong word to use in Buddhism but
that's the word we use in English the
outcome of meditation in Buddhism is
tearing up desire by its roots which is
to say not just destroying desire short
term not just satisfying your desires
but in some sense crippling your ability
to feel desire so that you never again
feel for example sexual desire and
sexual desires in some ways the most
powerful and most important example in
this religious context because these are
men who
supposed to be living in celibacy and
not just living in celibacy but they're
they're not even tempted by sex now
within the pally Canon there's a there's
a fair bit of evidence that many of the
monks were tempted by text if you
include include the vidya but the idea
is once you a tea attain nirvana you are
tearing up desired by the roots now that
is dogmatically asserted to be the
highest happiness the truest happiness
that you can attain in your life so that
the this is philosophy sensu stricto
this is this is philosophy in the
clearest sense through philosophy
philosophically buddhists were arguing
that instead of gratifying your desires
instead of going through a perpetual
process akin to you know scratching an
itch and then feeling an itch again you
are eliminating the cycle of desire and
satisfaction and yearning so it's like
instead of feeling hungry and then
feeling full you're eliminating both by
tearing up through desire where you
don't feel appetite and so you neither
feel hungry nor full but this is being
sent to all the desires so sexual desire
but also for exact example the desire of
the eye to see beautiful things the
desire of the nose to smell Pleasant
smells that is the principle the thing
and they're arguing that is the highest
happiness however from a modern Western
secular perspective obviously that is
not happiness that's not the kind of
happiness that a business executive is
looking for to balance his busy schedule
at the office um you know he's balancing
his divorce and his girlfriend and you
know running back and forth between jobs
and I don't know visiting his kids in
private school you know the type of
wealthy western patron for Buddhism that
the whole system is set up to flatter
and entice and to get the money out of
that's the reality when Buddhist monks
are preaching to that sort of figure
they're not going to tell them that the
happiness we're talking about here is
completely incompatible with the life of
a modern Western secular person on the
contrary many many monks and this is
even more obvious in Mahayana Buddhism
preach that Buddhism can improve your
sex life that it can help you deal with
stress that I can you know
help you with this kind of personal this
quest for personal happiness in the
midst of life of bourgeois luxury and
the busy distractions of a modern
executive in the workplace etc so yeah
in that sense it's complete and
another sense it's like well what do you
mean by the word happiness anyway we
continue this guy John you've only been
playing the Buddhist game for one year
but you're doing better than most and I
think that's because you didn't become a
victim of one of these cult leaders of
whom there are plenty in the game um so
he says my own an educated perspective
is the meditation was never intended as
a prescription for happiness indeed I
see it as a long-term process whose
objective is related to seeing truth
through realizing the three
characteristics as if you said that's
part of the story you also have to look
at desire there are there are other
factors too i'm not telling this isn't a
lecture on all the factors of connected
to nirvana uh maybe a longer lecture to
this end i've been reading ajahn Brahm I
saw urgent problem is a modern person
he's not an ancient figure for those you
don't know I acknowledge that his
teaching is often condescending and even
pure aisle but I think he makes a
convincing argument that Jonna is
essential so Jonah is JH aana jaana okay
the process is a long one lifelong I
think this is at the heart of Western
distaste of Eastern Buddhism quote I
want on feedback and I want it now so
therefore quote unquote you pastor
practice is attractive to Westerners
thanks to folks like Joseph Goldstein no
comment they see as a shortcut to
Nirvana based on what you've said in
your videos I realize that you are not
so enamored of the currently prolly
prominent members of the Sangha so it is
with some trepidation that su attributes
are so I'm just going to answer that one
central point that he raises he is
asking me more broadly to comment but
we're keeping this video short um yes
fundamentally Jonna is meditation and
anyone who tells you anything different
is either lying to you intentionally or
they're preaching out of ignorance and
that is a great shame I think it is
really unfortunate that in the English
language we use the word meditation at
all for what is supposed to happen in
Buddhism for the
Ana's as a translation for the jhanas
and who how we gonna break down look at
how we've used the word meditation in
English there is a very famous book
titled meditations by marcus aurelius so
that is the english translation of the
title of an ancient roman book from the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius and it was
translated in english as meditations
another way to translate title that book
would be thoughts to myself so private
thoughts and that was translated as
meditations so our concept of meditation
in Marcus Aurelius in Catholicism in
Western philosophy has nothing to do
with Buddhism it has nothing to do with
with jonna or what this this concept was
and then on the other hand the vagueness
of that idea of meditation has allowed
people to play around with what concepts
in ancient pally in ancient Chinese or
theoretically in ancient Sanskrit
Sanskrit is pretty useless that's
another story but you know in these
ancient languages what texture drawing
on and what you're interpreting his
meditations there was one text that i
thought was outrageously bad there was a
modern thesis and published as a book
and endorsed by Richard Gombrich himself
as a matter of fact I'm not going to
name the author and it was hilarious it
was speaking little bits and pieces of
passages that had nothing to do with
meditation and was misrepresenting them
in English as if the topic being
described had to do with meditation so
there's a very evocative image in the
pally canon of the sharpness of a knife
where it's saying and this is an ancient
India not modern steel not modern going
to a knife shop but anyway that in
ancient India you know you look at the
blade of a knife you can't tell just by
looking at it whether it is sharp or
dull you can't tell a sharp is it's in
the practice of the thing you have to
use you have to cut something so you
know like today you can cut a piece of
paper I don't remember the giving
example and we cut a cut a piece of
grass or something to see whether or not
the knife is truly sharp but you can't
tell just by looking at a blade
comparing a sharp blade to a dull blade
or well honed blade to not only it's a
nice image it's a nice poetic moment in
a philosophical debate in Buddhism but
what they're too
eating actually has nothing to do with
johnna and has nothing to do with
meditation so today in English it's very
easy for a modern translator take an
image like that misrepresented turn it
into some kind of sexy as he says
bastardized philosophy and take so
called meditation different way so the
fact that meditation for one thing it
starts to start with it is a totally
inappropriate concept the Catholic idea
of meditation is not appropriate to
Buddha's at all not at all and then the
ain't that sense in which it's used in
ancient Greek philosophy in ancient
Roman philosophy which is get a modern
English translation it's not how the
Greeks themselves or the Romans himself
said it but how people in England in the
last couple of centuries have used the
word meditation in in translating those
philosophies in English that also is not
appropriate to Buddhism at all and then
finally this is like a loose fitting set
of clothes it never covers and it never
it never covers what you want to cover
and it never reveals what you want to
reveal and the much simpler reality is
johnna why does nobody want to locate
why do extremely few people want to
bluntly and honestly say what we mean by
meditation is johnna and when we talk
about John now we're talking about
meditation in Buddhist philosophy
because the descriptions of Jonah are
very precise and very clear what it
means and what that experience is
supposed to be and it is in part a
hallucinatory experience and that
basically puts you into the corner of
having to admit yes reincarnation
matters yes you know transcendental
experience matters yes you know these
specific visions that are described as
progressing through the jhanas in the
text that matters that's the crucial
central part of the Buddhist meditative
experience all of a sudden this is
something you can't easily repackage and
sell to an executive or an architect
who's going through his second divorce
and is coming to a Buddhist temple one
to donate money to the monks and looking
for a but you know flexible clients
doctrine that's going to make his sex
life better and improve his self-esteem
and maybe make him feel like more of an
intellectual etc but who has no interest
in renouncing his sex life renouncing
all of his worldly possessions shaving
his head
buddhist monk he is no interest in
tearing up desire by its roots he has no
interest in a meditative practice the
purpose of which is to destroy your
ability to enjoy life now Buddhists
philosophically claim that this practice
it doesn't just destroy your ability to
enjoy life it also destroys the sorrow
and suffering which is I think easy for
us to imagine if you actually feel no
hunger feel no appetite then you maybe
do not suffer when you eat poorly when
you don't eat enough etc if you actually
feel no attraction to the opposite sex
or no attraction to the same sex then
you don't suffer when you live in
celibacy okay so philosophically we can
agree with that how are you going to
package that and sell that in 21st
century California harder to do how are
you going to package and sell something
like the jhanas the experience the
jhanas that sat down text where there's
a very clear checklist in the ancient
texts of what this experience is
supposed to be whether you have it don't
have it and even some very senior
Buddhist monks Buddhist monks who were
you know had the highest level of metals
on their chest in Buddhism they tend to
get really uncomfortable when you
actually talk specifically about the
jhanas like so have you or have you not
experienced you know peace out that says
there as they sat down in the text so um
people keep it vague for a reason right
people cling to the shadows and fog for
I think some very clear reasons that's
really where I mean it's sort of a new
superstition that modern Buddhists have
tried to create and at the same time
they're in a state of denial as to what
the old superstitions the old magical
beliefs and Buddhism really were and if
we want to move forward in an authentic
and honest way and Buddhism we both have
to acknowledge what ancient Buddhism was
and we have to acknowledge what we as
people in the modern world can and
cannot believe maybe what you so we can
make of it the way to honor Socrates the
way to honor Aristotle is not to
misrepresent their teaching as if they
were more modern than they were let's
appreciate what is ancient as ancient
let's appreciate what is superstitious
as merely superstitious and in terms of
philosophy ultimately the Challenger
Buddhism must be to produce a new
philosophy it
cannot possibly be to rehash and
misrepresent an ancient philosophy in a
way that's going to sell more tickets or
draw more donations or convince people
that they have a better sex life thanks
to some phony ass bastardized version of
a meditative practice that was
absolutely bound to a life of celibacy